This README.txt file was updated on 17 August 2023 by Zoey Neale

GENERAL INFORMATION

1. Paper information
Citation: Zoey Neale and Volker Rudolf. 2025.Thermal responses of feeding rates differ across co-occurring predator species. In review

Abstract: Changes in global temperature regimes are expected to transform species interactions in natural communities. However, predicting the consequences of warming on populations and communities is challenging because species interact with a range of community members. In theory, species should be adapted to their local temperature regimes, which might suggest a parallel shift across species interactions. But this may not hold if differences in traits (e.g., physiology or ecology) between sympatric species lead to concurrent differences in thermal responses. Here, we compare the thermal responses of feeding rates of 6 aquatic predator species from the same community feeding on the same prey species. Individual predators were experimentally exposed to temperatures ranging from 5-35°C, spanning the temperature range of their native habitat. We found qualitative and quantitative differences in thermal response curves of per-capita feeding rates across species that led to a shift in the rankings of species’ per-capita predation rates along the temperature gradient. Of the six species tested, only two demonstrated the expected hump-shaped response of feeding rate to temperature within the range tested, while feeding rates of the other four species increased monotonically. Additional experiments indicated the lethal temperatures for each predator were greater than the maximum temperature at which prey could survive, though for some, it was only greater by 2-3C. Interestingly, this suggests that the decline in predation rates at higher temperatures predicted by past studies may not always be biologically relevant in natural systems. Furthermore, we found that the feeding rates of consumers differed in thermal optimum and sensitivity to changes in temperature. Consequently, increasing feeding rates with rising temperatures in one species could be offset by decreasing feeding rates in another. These results indicate the need to account for differences in the thermal per-capita response among predator species within communities to predict how temperature changes across seasons and years influence the interactions and dynamics of natural communities. 

2. Originators
Neale, Zoey, Rice University. zrneale@gmail.com
Rudolf, Volker, Rice University. vr2@rice.edu

3. Contact information
Zoey Neale
zneale@gmail.com

4. Date of data collection:
2020-2021

5. Geographic location of data collection:
Houston, TX

6. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:
NSF DEB- 1655626

ACCESS INFORMATION

1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data: 
None

2. Data derived from other sources.
None

3. Recommended citation for this dataset: 
Zoey Neale and Volker Rudolf. 2023.  Warming leads to shifts in predator hierarchy within communities.

DATA AND CODE FILE OVERVIEW
This data repository contains 2 data files, 2 code scripts, and this README document, with the following data and code filenames and variables:

Data files and variables
1. pred.hier.feed.csv contains the number of surviving prey at the end of each feeding trial.Variables: 
    trial - the trial number/temporal block
    bath - the numeric ID of the water bath
    location - the numeric ID of the location within the waterbath
    predmass - the drymass of the predator
    temp - the temperature in Celcius
    pred - the predator species
	Buen = Buenoa scimitar
	Copto = Coptotomus loticus
	Indica = Notonecta indica
	Irrorata = Notonecta irrorata
	Pachy = Pachydiplax longipennis
	Tramea = Tramea carolina
    surv - the number of surviving prey
    dead - the number of dead prey
2. pred.heat.tol.csv contains the number of predators surviving at the end of heat tolerance trials. Variables:
    trial - the trial number/temporal block ID
    chamber - the environmental chamber number
    bath - the numeric ID of the water bath
    temp - the temperature in Celsius
    species - the predator species
	Buen = Buenoa scimitar
	Copto = Coptotomus loticus
	Indica = Notonecta indica
	Irrorata = Notonecta irrorata
	Pachy = Pachydiplax longipennis
	Trame = Tramea carolina
    numSurv = the number of surviving individuals in the water bath
    numTotal = the total number of individuals tested in water bath
    
    
Code scripts and workflow:
  
  1. feedRates.R estimates predator feed rates and produces figures
  
  2. heatTolerance.R estimates the predator heat tolerances and produces figures
  
 
  SOFTWARE VERSIONS:
  R 4.2.2
  
  REFERENCES
  None
  
